A Garland of Fresh Utpala Flowers

A Brief Synopsis of The Treasury of Precious Qualities, a Treatise of Pith Instructions

by Patrul Rinpoche

In general, when giving any Dharma teaching, there is an explanation of 1) the preliminary topics
and 2) the actual teaching.

1. The Preliminary Topics

The first has three sections: 1) the ways in which the teachings are given, 2) how the teacher
should teach and the students listen, and 3) the benefits of teaching and listening.

1. The Ways in Which the Teachings Are Given

There are three styles of teaching: 1) the style of the buddhas, 2) the style of the śrāvaka
arhats, and 3) the style of learned paṇḍitas. The buddhas teach by way of miracles, the śrāvakas
by way of the three pure factors, and the paṇḍitas according to how it was done either
at Nālandā or Vikramaśīla. At the monastery of Nālandā, the Words of the Buddha were
taught in terms of the five perfections and the treatises by means of five principal considerations.
The paṇḍitas of Vikramaśīla taught by transforming the audience into suitable vessels
and determining the presentations of the teaching. Transforming students into suitable
recipients has three points[1] and determining the presentations of the teachings also
consists of three points.[2]

2. How to Teach and Listen

This concerns 1) the master who teaches, 2) the students who listen, and 3) what they have in
common.

3. The Benefits of Teaching and Listening[3]

This is explained in the text itself.

2. The Actual Teaching

This has two parts: 1) an explanation of the specific topic, and 2) an elaborate explanation
of the meaning of the text.

1. Explanation of the Specific Topic

This employs both the five major structural themes and the fourfold interrelated purpose.

2. Elaborate Explanation of the Meaning of the Text

This consists of explanations of the introduction, main part and conclusion. The first, the
introduction, includes an explanation of the title, offering prostrations, paying homage and
the commitment to compose.

The main part of the text has thirteen chapters.

The conclusion has four parts:[4] 1) the reason for composing the treatise, 2) openly admitting
and confessing mistakes and 3) generating delight among followers, and 4) dedicating the
roots of virtue. With this the text is completed.

May all be virtuous!

This was written by the Lord of Dharma Patrul Rinpoche when he taught Kunzang Tekchok Dorje.[5]

| Translated by Han Kop with the kind assistance of Khenpo Sonam Tsewang, 2021.