Mirror of the Mind

Prologue to The Treasury of Precious Qualities

by Patrul Rinpoche

Here, there are three points which need to be explained in order to make students suitable recipients
for the teaching: 1) the greatness of the author, the master, 2) the greatness of
the composition, and 3) the way to impart and listen to a teaching that has such qualities.

1. The Greatness of the Author, the Master

The author of this treatise is the Great Perfection adept Rangjung Dorje, the Vidyādhara Jigme
Lingpa. He had an excellent grasp of, and great devotion for, the teachings of the Bliss-Gone
One (sugata). Although he did not strive to develop the intellectual knowledge born
of study and contemplation, still, through the force of directly seeing the nature of ultimate
reality, the natural state of the Great Perfection, which is the wisdom that understands
the nature of things, he gained the wisdom born of meditation that comprehends all things
in their multiplicity, and thus came to master the insight that precisely discerns phenomena.
In addition, he wore the armour of working for the benefit of himself and others
with great compassion during post-meditation.

2. The Greatness of the Composition

The Dharma teaching that concerns us here is the treatise called The Treasury of Precious Qualities,
which contains the pith instructions of limitless vehicles, including the Great Vehicle.

3. The Way to Impart and Listen to a Teaching That Has Such Qualities

This is explained through five major structural themes.

1.The Purpose

The Treasury of Precious Qualities has thirteen chapters and is intended for fortunate individuals
who can easily realize and comprehend its meaning by listening, contemplating and meditating.
It is a sacred, skilful means for accomplishing the two aims, temporary and ultimate.
That is its purpose.

2. The Summarised Meaning

The text consists of three parts: the causes of setting out on the path, the path itself, and
the ultimate fruition.

3. The Meaning of the Words

This is explained when the text is taught in an elaborate manner.

4. Showing How All the Chapters Are Connected

The first chapter explains the reasons why the freedoms and advantages are difficult to obtain,
and this functions as a cause for entering the Dharma.

The second chapter explains that such freedoms and advantages are by nature impermanent. This
serves as an encouragement to enter the Dharma swiftly and with diligence rather than procrastinating
and leaving it for another time.

The third chapter explains what to abandon and what to adopt concerning actions and their results,
given that in addition to things being impermanent, our next life is determined exclusively
by good and bad actions.

The fourth chapter teaches the suffering of saṃsāra, since the results of positive and negative
actions are the realms of the six classes.

Once the suffering of saṃsāra is understood, the fifth chapter then explains the skilful means
to eliminate that, namely the group of the 'four great wheels' that provide an entrance
to the Dharma.[1]

For someone who possesses these four great wheels in their entirety, the sixth chapter teaches
taking refuge, since this is the foundation and support for entering the teachings.

The seventh chapter then teaches the four immeasurables, which, after taking refuge, mark the
initial entrypoint to the Great Vehicle.

The eighth chapter teaches the actual generation of the mind set upon awakening (bodhicitta),
since training the mind in the four immeasurables automatically causes bodhicitta to arise
and makes the mind pliable.

The ninth chapter then teaches the precepts of bodhicitta in aspiration and action, since it
is necessary, once bodhicitta is aroused, to train correctly in its precepts and thereby
maintain it without fail.

Someone who has generated bodhicitta in this way will naturally become magnanimous and a suitable
vessel for the profound Dharma. It is appropriate for such an individual to enter the
path of the Vajra Vehicle of Secret Mantra, since it is a blissful and swift path. Thus,
in order to explain this further, the tenth chapter teaches the general nature of the Secret
Mantra Vehicle and the eleventh and twelfth chapters thoroughly describe the ground and
path of the Great Perfection and fully demonstrate how they constitute an excellent way
for those of sharper faculties to gain liberation within a single lifetime. The thirteenth
chapter then thoroughly reveals the ultimate fruition that comes from bringing the path to
completion in this way.

5. Explanation Through Responses to Objections

When this text is explained elaborately any possible arguments from opponents will be thoroughly
eliminated through logical analysis based on scripture and reasoning and everything will
thus be made clear.

This was spoken by Patrul.

| Translated by Han Kop with the kind assistance of Khenpo Sonam Tsewang, 2021.